+++
title = "The hyphenated text postcard"
subtitle = "How a British Lord invented the web"
date = "2020-07-14"
tags = [""]
image = "/posts/2020-07-14-ancient-http/shakespeare.jpg"
image_info = "The only preserved painting of Lord Timothy Learnersbee (who by mistake gets often confused with William Shakespeare!)"
image_colouring = "10"
image_offset = "20%"
id = "mOGE3"
url = "mOGE3/lord-timothy-and-the-hyphenated-text-postcard"
aliases = ["mOGE3"]
+++

The rise of the World Wide Web gets commonly associated with the scientific activities at CERN in the 1980s and ’90s. What few people do know, however, is that there already existed a small-scale predecessor of the web a few centuries ago somewhere in Britain, which – upon closer examination – had remarkable similarities with the internet as we know it today. Unfortunately, only very little evidence got passed on about this piece of history, so over time it largely fell into oblivion. I only know about this legend from hearsay as well, so I tried my best to recall it and put it into writing for posterity. (Please be aware, though, that I cannot guarantee for any historical accuracy whatsoever!)

## Lord Timothy and his sleepy butler

The story took place in the mid 17th century in southern Great Britain, more precisly in a county governed by a wealthy family that went by the name Learnersbee. Son and heir was Lord Timothy, an aristocratic but good-natured man in the prime of his life. Business matters were all taken care of by sedulous staff, so the Lord himself could spend most of his days according to his own liking: that is, to pursue his passion for learning and to satisfy his everlasting hunger for knowledge. He was not only the most well-read and universally erudite person far and wide at that time, but it was also his heartfelt concern to spread the spark of education among his fellow human beings, in particular the poorer folks that were subject of his.

The most comprehensive resource for knowledge back then was the infamous Great Encyclopædia Wicitannica. Only a handful of moneyed families, such as the Learnersbees, were able to afford all of its approximately eighteen-thousand leather-bound volumes. The complete edition filled seven long aisles of bookshelves, covering all imaginable topics from “a” like aardvark (a peculiar anteater-like pig-kind-of-animal) via “i” like “Ireland” (a then relatively new but also unpleasantly rebellious extension of the British empire), through to “z” like Zygmund Freud (author of the best-selling novel “The adventures of Dr. Oedipus“).

Like most British people, Lord Timothy relished the comfort of a grave armchair and valued having a fresh cup of tea within arm’s reach above everything else. A lifestyle, however, that by far not everyone was able to enjoy – least of all Timothy’s butler Isaac. While the Lord virtually never left his study room throughout the day, his butler constantly had to rush around between the endless bookshelves of the mansion’s private library. He was climbing up and down the creaking ladders, hastily gathering the books that the Lord wanted to browse through next. But as soon as Isaac had hauled a heavy pile of tomes over to the study room, Lord Timothy would send him back again with yet another list of titles to fetch.

That, day after day, over and over again, was how the years went by at the Learnersbee villa – until early October 1659. It was a drizzly, murky and overall dull afternoon (like most afternoons in Britain) and Lord Timothy was just about to finish a cup of mediocre second flush Darjeeling tea. His butler Isaac had already left for the library an hour ago to search for a couple of Wicitannica volumes. Lord Timothy, who felt a bit uneasy that day anyway (not to mention the rather underwhelming beverage), eventually lost patience. He heaved himself up from his armchair and shuffled over to the library to see “what the bloody Deuce” was going on. Upon his arrival he found Isaac sitting on the floor with his back leaning against the column of a bookshelf, blissfully snoring.

Lord Timothy wasn’t amused. Despite his exceptionally calm temperament and polite manners (even by British standards), he lost his composure for the fraction of a second. A twinge of sheer anger made him stamp his foot on the wooden floor, with such vigor that it almost took the windows off their hinges. Before Isaac had a chance to realise what was going on, a book in one of the upper shelves came loose and fell down, right onto the butler’s head. The then following occurrence was accurately recorded in Isaac’s journal: Lord Timothy appeared to be glued to the spot for a long-lasting, awkward moment, until he suddenly screamed “Eureka!” – and burst away, back to his study room, in which he locked himself in for 3 days in a row.

## Postcards by the ton

This odd incident in October 1659 is said to be the birth of a remarkable idea, which was regionally referred to as “hyphenated text postcards”. The idea behind it was technically groundbreaking and humanly honourable at the same time. Everybody in Learnersbeeshire should have access to a government-run communication infrastructure that allowed them to freely exchange ideas and information with anyone in the entire county – no matter where they lived, what social class they belonged to, how old they were, rich or poor, man or woman, weak or strong.

This invention got implemented county-wide within just a couple of months and can be best described as a postcard-based message exchange system. Centrepieces – and also widely recognisable symbol – were small, square-shaped kiosks, painted in glaring red, which got erected in the centre of every village. These kiosks had windows to all sides and were manned with a dispatcher during the daytime. Every citizen could just walk up to them in order to record and send out a message. (Keep in mind that most people were illiterate at that time, so it was the dispatcher’s job to put the text on paper.) The message itself was captured on the foreside of a small, roughly hand-sized piece of paper, along with some meta-information about sender and recipient. In order to save precious space on the card the notation followed a strictly standardised protocol, in which the different parts of the message were separated by hyphens (hence the term “hyphenated text postcard”).

Whoever was about to leave town – be it by foot, on a horseback, with a carriage, from the poorest beggar to the Lord himself – was officially obligated to stop by the kiosk beforehand and pick up a batch of postcards. The clue was that these were not sorted and dispatched by destination but rather by direction. So if someone would leave on an eastbound path, they just carried all postcards corresponding to that direction and drop them off at the kiosk of the next village on their route. There the respective dispatcher would go through all incoming postcards and resort them accordingly. That way the messages gradually but steadily moved towards their designated destination, until they eventually arrived. And as there usually was brisk traffic between the villages throughout the day (except for Sundays of course) this routing procedure was both fast and also astonishingly reliable. At the target locations the postcards were delivered to the recipients once or twice a day. (Analogous to the writing, the dispatcher mostly had to read out the messages aloud.) The reponse was captured on the backside of the postcard and transmitted back via the same mechanism.

For all we know today, some hundred postcards were underway during peak times every day. The content of the messages was as different as the people who posted them: a caring mother, who wanted to know whether her son had safely arrived after a day’s journey to a neighbouring village. A price-conscious farmer, who wanted to compare offers between different cattle traders in the greater region. A sick person, who wanted to seek advice from a remote doctor. In order to promote discoverability everyone was able to register in a public directory. Each kiosk had its own copy of that directory and changes were regularly broadcasted via special postcards to all the other kiosks.

It was a matter of honour for Lord Timothy to be registrant from the very start, so he offered access to his private library. And, to his own surprise, people made excessive use of the opportunity to utilise it. Questions from all over the county arrived at the Learnersbee villa every day: curious kids wanted to know what there is behind the horizon, worried aristocrats asked about the latest developments regarding the Commonwealth, and eager housewives wanted to learn about the effects of some herbs they had collected. Timothy soon had to detail a savant whose sole responsibility it was to answer the daily increasing volume of requests.

## A political wind of change

As you can imagine, the hyphenated text postcard project had the potential to be a massive game changer – remember that we are talking about the 17th century here. Unforunately, it didn’t even get a chance to take off, it rather ended as aprupt as it had begun: Lord Timothy Learnersbee got dishonourably dismissed in the light of the restoration of the Stuart monarchy in late 1660. Appointed successor and leader of the county thereupon was Lord Boris, Son of John II., an uncompromising traditionalist and ardent proponent of the monarchy, who didn’t find too much pleasure in the notion of an interconnected and increasingly open-minded populace. The hyphenated text postcards were doomed to extinction and Lord Timothy’s faith is unbeknownst.

All in all, this little chapter in the British history is not just interesting from a purely technical point of view, but it is also an impressive example that shows how infrastructure and technology in its broadest sense can have a powerful impact on society for the good of all. At the same time, however, the course of events drastically prove how the success of forward-looking political ideas is largely dependent on the whims of those who rule. (And that, for a change, not just in Britain.)
