---
layout:        blogpost
title:         A JavaScript city tour in Budapest
subtitle:      My notes on JSConfBP in May 2016
date:          2016-05-12
tags:          [conference, javascript]
redirect_from: /asdf1/
permalink:     asdf1/jsconf-budapest-2016
image:         /assets/2016/beachchair-ocean.jpg
---

## “What you everybody should know about npm”

[Laurie Voss]() highlighted, that npm is way more than just a simple manager for JavaScript packages. It also offers great support for collaborating on/with packages. Here are 3 weird old tricks, that many people don’t know about:

- Store your configuration in a `config` section and then it is available as environment variable.
- Safely rerun `npm init` everytime and it will cleanup your packages.json. Speaken of which: Don’t edit your packages.json by hand; npm does a better job in doing so.
- Keep your dependencies up to date with [Greenkeeper](https://greenkeeper.io/). It fully automates the update process: the only thing you need to do is accepting a pull request.

## “The Hitchhiker’s Guide to All Things Memory in JS”

[]() refreshed the basics concerning memory management and garbage collection in JavaScript. In practice, when you want to analyze and optimize the memory consumption of your JavaScript apps, you need to choose the right tools depending on the platform your are working on:

- Use `npm heapdump` for debugging in the V8
- Use the Chrome DevTools () in the browser

## “Encryipt the Web For $0”

Start using HTTP/2 if ever possible, since it offers major improvements over HTTP/1.x.

Start using encryption: even big players like Netflix do so. With [“Let’s encrypt”] it cannot be simpler to setup secure connections.

## “Why Performance matters”

If the performance of your website suck, so do your conversions. There are a lot of studies, that prove this thesis. However, it is important to understand, that performance is not all about bare numbers and measures – instead, it is rather all about perception.[^1]

- Show meaningful content to the user as quick as possible
- Make smart assumptions about the userflow: then it is possible to preload resources.


[^1]: “The perception of performance …” (Apple)
