_drafts/2016-12-31-job-interview-as-developer.md, before:

---
layout:        blogpost
title:         The job interview
subtitle:      Asking questions as a candidate
date:          2016-12-31
tags:          [hiring, job]
redirect_from: /abcdef/
permalink:     abcdef/the-job-interview
image:         /assets/2016/.jpg
---

# General process

- Meet the people you actually gonna work with
- Different companies/positions have different interview processes/questions
- There is no right/wrong. But there might be red flags
- Questions are examples and more an entry point for a conversation


# Architecture / Technology

### What does your tech stack currently look like?
- Programming languages, runtimes
- Frameworks, libraries
- Build and deployment

### Who makes decisions on technologies?
- How are the flight levels calibrated between team, teamleads, CTO and upper management?

### How does the architecture evolve?
- Are there dedicated architects, that specify/predetermine an architecture?
- How do you review your architectural choices?


# Code

### How do you ensure quality?
- Testing concept?
- Code metrics?
- Code reviews, merge policies?

### What does your testing concept look like?

### What standards, policies and conventions do you have?
- Communication, documentation


# Build / Deployment / Releasing

### What steps have to happen when I want to change production code?

- Technology: version control; CI; tests; deploy setup
- Process: code review; business approval; deploy process

### Who can make releases and who is responsible for that?
- Developer vs. release manager vs. entire team (incl. PO/PM)?

### Do you release on friday evenings?
- Follow up: How often do you usually release?


# Team

### How do you know, what you do on each day?
- Sprint planning; work-day planning

### What is the current team performance?
- Are there measurements on team performance?
- Who takes care of addressing impediments?

### What are the biggest impediments at the moment?
- How do you identify them? (Retrospective, Scrum Master/Agile coach)
- What do you do to solve them?


# Production

### How do you know, that your software is healthy right now?

### Who is responsible for monitoring the production applications?

### How do you find, track, analyse and fix bugs?


# Process

### How do you plan features?
- How do ideas become features?
- How are developers involved into the feature/product process?

### With whom do I collaborate? And with whom not? How does collaboration look like?
- Who is involved in the product development process? (PO/PM, UX, FE, BE, QA, …)
- How do these people communicate/collaborate with each other?

### What do you do to get better?
- What does innovation mean to you?
- On individual, team and company level

Commit message:

Write intro and revise topics

_drafts/2016-12-31-job-interview-as-developer.md, after:

---
layout:        blogpost
title:         The job interview
subtitle:      Asking questions as a candidate
date:          2016-12-31
tags:          [hiring, job]
redirect_from: /abcdef/
permalink:     abcdef/the-job-interview
image:         /assets/2016/.jpg
---

Most software companies put a lot of thought into the elaboration of an interview process for applicants. This is not for nothing: Even though software developers are a dime a dozen, it is hard to find good people who are not just smart and fit into the company culture, but have at the same time a solid track record in what they do.

There are tons of articles that give advice for HR on how to measure the skillset of a candidate and also get a realistic insight into their motivation and how they think about their work. On the other hand though, there is very little to find[^1] about the other side of interview process: Finding *the right* company as applicant.

At the time of this writing, I am about to relocate to Berlin and am looking for a new job there. I recently have spent much thought on how to find a place I really want to work and I tried to come up with a methodological procedure on how to approach my search. In general, there are three criteria that I try to evaluate, and they come in this order:

1. **Team** – As I spend a considerable amount of time with my colleagues, I attribute a lot of importance to a respectful, constructive and diverse environment. I want to collaborate with people who are self-aware and enthusiastic (but not obsessed) about what they do.
2. **Product** – I never term myself a programmer: Although I see writing code and mastering tools as a craft I continuously try to get better in, the real value comes from the product that I am contributing to. Being part of that is what makes my work meaningful eventually.
3. **Technology** – I do not give excessive weight to particular technologies, so it’s not important to me to work with certain libraries or programming languages. In regards to the product, I like to see technology as an enabler of productivity. On a personal level, I want to steadily learn and explore all the cool stuff, that is out there.

# General process

A few thoughts upfront: Although it is called a job “interview”, I consider this term to be too one-sided. The purpose of the whole process is to get to know each other and to find out if both sides see a value in working together. In fact, I see the interview more to be a conversation and I want to meet the people that I actually gonna work with.

As different companies and positions have different demands and expectations, the procedure described in this blogpost is highly opinionated: They must be seen as examples and are eventually just an entry point for a conversation. Also, there is no right/wrong and also no scorecard that gives a countable answer in the end. (However, there might be red cards, of course.) However, the topics that I raise here should yield a good picture that serves as a basis to make a reasonale decision.


# Architecture / Technology

### What does your tech stack currently look like?
- Programming languages, runtimes
- Frameworks, libraries
- Build and deployment

### Who makes decisions on technologies? How does the architecture evolve?
- How are the flight levels calibrated between team, teamleads, CTO and upper management?
- Are there dedicated architects, that specify/predetermine an architecture?
- How do you review your architectural choices?


# Build / Deployment / Releasing

### What steps have to happen when I want to change production code?

- Technology: version control; CI; tests; deploy setup
- Process: code review; business approval; deploy process
- Responsibility for releases: Developer vs. release manager vs. entire team (incl. PO/PM)?

### Do you release on friday evenings? How do you know, that your software is healthy right now?
- Follow up: How often do you usually release?


# Team

### How do you know, what you do on each day?
- Sprint planning; work-day planning

### What is the current team performance?
- Are there measurements on team performance?
- Who takes care of addressing impediments?
- How do productivity and team work get improved?

### What are the biggest impediments at the moment?
- How do you identify them? (Retrospective, Scrum Master/Agile coach)
- What do you do to solve them?


# Code

### How do you ensure quality?
- Testing concept?
- Code metrics?
- Code reviews, merge policies?

### What standards, policies and conventions do you have?
- Communication, documentation

### How do you find, track, analyse and fix bugs?


# Process

### How do you plan features?
- How do ideas become features?
- How are developers involved into the feature/product process?

### With whom do I collaborate? And with whom not? How does collaboration look like?
- Who is involved in the product development process? (PO/PM, UX, FE, BE, QA, …)
- How do these people communicate/collaborate with each other?

### What do you do to get better?
- What does innovation mean to you?
- On individual, team and company level


[^1]: [This blogpost](https://medium.com/@djsmith42/how-to-interview-as-a-developer-candidate-b666734f12dd#.8ytpeoyjb) by Dave Smith was a huge inspiration for me.
